SPECIFIC AIMS

There are 3.5 million sport-related injuries to minors annually1 with over 50% (potentially over 1.75 million)
due
to falls and collisions. 2-5 In soccer, player collisions are the most common injury mechanism (i.e., 57% of all
injuries). 4 Soccer participation is highest of all sports, with 265 million global athletes: its recent growth driven by
increased female participation. 6,7 Female soccer athletes are twice as likely as males to suffer serious
musculoskeletal injury due to player collisions, 8 significantly increasing their risk of developing severe long-term
negative outcomes (e.g., osteoarthritis). 9 Our preliminary data indicate 59% of collisions in girls' soccer are
unanticipated (i.e., a collision the athlete does not see coming10 Despite significant negative effects of these
collision injuries in sports such as girls' soccer4,5. little is known about mechanisms underlying their prevention.
Thus, an urgent need exists to fill this knowledge gap to reduce the incidence of and impact forces associated
with unanticipated collisions, resultant musculoskeletal injuries, and their negative sequelae in female athletes.

Unanticipated collisions are associated with deficiencies in mechanisms (e.g., neuromechanics, perceptual-
motor) underlying an athlete's ability to effectively modify behavior to meet sport challenges.
11-13
Phenotypic
plasticity
(PP)
is a basic concept in biology 14 that captures an organism's fitness, or "readiness", to respond to
environmental
changes. 15 Thus, an athlete's PP quantifies her general adaptability to on-field conditions,
including her responsiveness to high risk collision scenarios. Quantification of PP, in this context, is based on a
time series of fitness scores indexed via neuromechanical variables, perceptual-motor variables, or both. Low
PP reflects faulty neuromechanical and/or perceptual-motor mechanisms hypothesized to increase
unanticipated collision risk and associated exposure to high impact forces. Our pilot data support this hypothesis
(see Preliminary Data) and indicate reduced perceptual-motor and neuromechanical fitness are related to more
unanticipated collisions and greater impact forces, with higher forces related to greater muscle injury severity.
16
Our published training data also indicate that neuromuscular training (NMT) positively affects neuromechanical
mechanisms that enhance athlete fitness, protecting athletes from musculoskeletal injuries. 17,18 Our augmented
NMT (aNMT; pronounced "animate") intervention-the focus of the parent grant, U01 AR067997-01A1, to this
application-was designed to enhance the protective effects of NMT against non-contact injuries via effective
neuromechanical responses and stimulate perceptual attention away from the body toward external,
environmental context. 11 Thus, aNMT is expected to be effective in promoting collision anticipation and the
reduction of impact force, through refinement of multimodal mechanisms that underlie PP.

Our long-term goal is to reduce collision-based musculoskeletal injuries. The overall objectives of this
ancillary proposal are to determine (a) what measures of PP best predict behaviors that result in on-field collision
(e.g., unanticipated collision frequency and impact magnitude) and (b) how aNMT affects such measures. We
will leverage the most applicable cohort (i.e., female soccer) from the NIH-funded clinical trial U01 AR067997-
01A1 examining pre-season aNMT and post-season testing for prevention of non-contact ACL injury, "Real-time
Sensorimotor Feedback for Injury Prevention Assessed in Virtual Reality". We will test the central hypothesis
that greater PP will lead to fewer unanticipated collisions and lower impact forces in female soccer athletes, and
that PP can be modified by aNMT. The rationale is that, after completion of this research, we will be able to
identify specific mechanisms of unanticipated collision risk, and a training protocol to address them-the first
step in reducing collision-based musculoskeletal injury. We will achieve this objective via two specific aims:

Specific Aim 1: Evaluate if prospective PP measures predict frequency and magnitude of unanticipated
collisions on the field of play. PP measures will be derived from mechanism-specific neuromechanical (center
of pressure dynamics and cutting/jumping power) and perceptual-motor (oculomotor eye gaze tracking) models,
and individual association with outcomes will be examined then optimized via integrated, multivariate models.
Specific Aim 2: Determine the effect of a pre-season aNMT intervention on the measures of PP and
underlying fitness scores. PP will be measured using time-series of fitness scores obtained during aNMT
training. Fitness scores obtained at post-training and post-season will also be compared to identify changes in,
and sustainability of, perceptual-motor and neuromechanical adaptations following aNMT.

The proposed research will provide insight into mechanisms supporting adaptive sport behavior, and
enhances the value of the parent project via the following expected outcomes: (1) identification of a highly
sensitive fitness-based, risk profile for injuries related to unanticipated collisions, (2) identification of modifiable
aspects of collision risk, and (3) expansion of the aNMT application to the prevention of contact injuries with
identified mechanistic targets for eventual protocol enhancement. These outcomes are the critical first steps for
improving detection of, and responses to, unanticipated collisions and the development of complete training
protocols to optimize injury prevention efforts for contact sport athletes. Our cross-disciplinary approach
capitalizing on the biological underpinnings of PP is highly innovative and efficiently leverages our currently
funded NIH U01 AR067997-01A1 clinical trial to, for the first time, optimize strategies to both quantify the
remaining risk not associated with non-contact injuries and, ultimately, reduce contact-based musculoskeletal
injury in female soccer athletes.


