Key Personnel/Biosketches
Mandatory review criteria include an assessment of key personnel. You should choose key personnel whose
training and experience match the science proposed in the application. Senior/Key Personnel are defined as
all individuals who contribute in a substantive, meaningful way to the scientific development or execution of the
project, whether or not salaries are requested. Consultants should be included if they meet this definition. You
should not include technicians or junior investigators unless they are providing specific expertise or skills
needed to complete the proposed research. If you are awarded the grant, any changes in key personnel must
be approved by the NIH program officer assigned to your grant. Your application should indicate to reviewers
that the key personnel on the application are very well suited to conduct the research. This is reflected in their
training and publication record. You don’t need to name each person working on the project as key personnel.
If collaborators from other institutions are part of key personnel, you will need to include letters of commitment
in your application that clearly spell out their roles and commitment to the project. For consultants, letters
should include rate/charge for consulting services.
Each Key Personnel must submit an NIH Biosketch form which requires a personal statement describing
relevant experience and qualifications that makes this person well suited for the role to be played in the project.
It also includes a section on publications, which can include up to 15 manuscripts in press or published articles.
The citations should include PMC numbers. (See Bibliography section below for an example of appropriate
citation format.) You may wish to select recent publications and those most relevant to the application. The
Grant Specialist will provide you with the proper biosketch form.
If you are a new or early stage investigator, be sure to note this when you register for eRA Commons and in
the personal statement. To determine whether you qualify, go to the NIH website and read the definition
(http://grants.nih.gov/grants/new_investigators/ ). Not only are new and early stage investigators eligible for
specific funding opportunities, but reviewers must take this status into consideration as well. Reviewers will
give greater consideration to the proposed approach, rather than the research track record. Early stage
applicants may have less preliminary data and fewer publications than more seasoned investigators, and NIH
reviewers understand this. Reviewers instead place more emphasis on how the investigator has demonstrated
that he or she is truly independent of any former mentors, whether he or she has some of his or her own
resources and institutional support, and whether he or she is able to independently lead the research.
In selecting key personnel, consider the following questions. Are the PI and other key personnel appropriately
trained and well-suited to carry out this work? Is the work proposed appropriate to the experience level of the
PI and other researchers? Do the PI and investigative team bring complementary and integrated expertise to
the project, if applicable?